Botanical Anishinaabe-gikendaasowin Within Anishinaabe-izhitwaawin  INTRODUCTION  The first step in Biskaabiiyang research is to return to our teachings. Only from that perspective can we begin to decolonize our knowledge and ourselves. When decolonizing written accounts of botanical gikendaasowin, therefore, we need to know to where we are returning; that is, we need to know how izhitwaawin maintains gikendaasowin. Part of this process requires the researcher’s internal self-reflection, and part of this process requires new external research. By piecing together information from colonized texts and comparing it with information coming from anishinaabe sources, we can understand how knowledge originates and is maintained within izhitwaawin. Once we have this understanding, we will be in a better position to search through these texts of colonized botanical gikendaasowin and make decisions about which pieces are usable, which pieces need to be elaborated, and which ones need to be discarded. As explained in the introduction, we as Anishinaabeg have our own reasons for conducting research on our culture. Rather than trying to explain ourselves to the rest of the world, we are trying to regain and revitalize teachings that were or are being lost from our families and communities. Biskaabiiyang research methodologies can help us achieve this goal by providing us with a common language through which researchers and community members can come together to discuss information and a means to decolonize ourselves so that we may accept and respect the information we receive through oral and written sources. Biskaabiiyang research begins with the researcher, who must evaluate the effects that colonization has had on his or own life and mind and, having recognized those effects, must return to our original teachings so that he or she can conduct meaningful research for our people. A lot of concepts and teachings in this chapter, when viewed through the eyes of the colonizer, appear “fictional,” “childish,” “not scholarly enough,” or just plain “ridiculous.” For instance, the importance of someone conversing with a plant and making an offering before picking it, although something I have done all my life, is not generally included in a “scholarly” text. Some academic texts describe this practice as something that Anishinaabeg do, but it is not discussed as an essential part of the research process. As someone who was raised in both the dominant culture and the anishinaabe culture, I had to see past the colonized portion of my mind before I could write this chapter. Biskaabiiyang research methodologies use informative sources differently than many other methodologies. This Biskaabiiyang research is an attempt to regain information so that it may be used to revitalize izhitwaawin; therefore, both oral and written sources are equally accepted. In some academic texts, written sources are used as a means of verifying an oral source, the accuracy of which is often questioned. One might argue that Biskaabiiyang research, at least the way it is used in this book, places a higher importance on oral teachings from our elders than on written sources.

PLANTS WITHIN IZHITWAAWIN  It should be noted that there are no words for “plant” or “botanical knowledge” in Anishinaabemowin, although there are names for different plants and various ways one can describe certain kinds of plants. There is a word for tree, mitig, but whether or not everything we think of as a “tree” in English falls into this category is a matter to be debated. Although one can describe wanting to know about how the Anishinaabeg use a mitig, the concept is alien to gikendaasowin because the use of trees and plants is not a category prescribed by gikendaasowin. Instead, there are things that one learns within the context of izhitwaawin, and these various things require learning about how to use, work with, and ask for the assistance of plants and trees. To make certain objects, such as shelters and canoes, or to prepare foods and medicines requires a certain amount of knowledge about working with plants and trees. There are also certain spiritual understandings about plants and trees that are necessary to participate in izhitwaawin. Therefore, although “plant knowledge” or “tree knowledge” are not terms that readily translate into Anishinaabemowin, having this knowledge is essential to many aspects of inaadiziwin and izhitwaawin. As will be explained in this chapter, botanical knowledge is an integral part of inaadiziwin and the decolonizing process.  MASHIKI WITHIN GIKENDAASOWIN  There are other categories of gikendaasowin into which botanical knowledge fits, such as mashkiki (medicine), but not everything within that category comes from botanical sources. When I first explained my research to Dora Dorothy Whipple, she responded by saying that if I was going to research plant medicines, I should also include spring water because within gikendaasowin it too is considered a mashkiki. During one of our recording sessions, she told me more about the importance and origin of  mookijiwaninibiish,1 spring water:  Mii giiwenh eta gii-noondamaan iko mewinzha, chi-mewinzha ... Anishinaabeg bwaa-gikendamowaad i’iw nibi. Gaazhi-bawaajiged aw inini ashi-nibo, aw inini aakozi. Gaazhi-bawaajiged iw. Minikwed i’iw. Giiwenh da-mino-ayaa. Mii gaazhi-maajaawaad iniw gii-ozhiwanikewaad gii-nan-donendamowaad iw nibi ... gaazhi-mikamowaad i’iw spring water Mii maa gii-kabeshiwaad. Miish iw gaa-minikwed ayiidog aw inini ashi-nibod aakozid. Mii gii-pawaajige giinwenh i’iw minikwed i’iw ji-mino-ayaad. Mii geget gaazhi-minikwed i’iw, mii maa gabeshiwaad Anishinaabeg. Ashi-mino-ayaad. Miish apane ezhi-noondamaan igo gaazhi-noondamangwaa igo Chi-anishinaabe gegoo iw ogii-manidoowendaanaawaa i’iw nibi, giiminikwewaad iw. Chi-wawaasa ko giiwenh gii-izhaawag iniw gii-nando-nendamowaad iw nibi. (pers. comm.)  Here Whipple says that a man who was very sick, almost dying, dreamed about spring water. When he drank it, after he awoke, he was well. She adds that the Anishinaabeg used to dig holes looking for spring water, and they would camp where they found it. The Chi-anishinaabeg, or Gichi-anishinaabeg (old-time Indians), saw spring water as a spiritual thing, she adds, and they would drink it. They would go far away to find it. Before telling this story, Whipple says that she herself uses spring water. Mary Geniusz says that Keewaydinoquay had certain medicines that she would only make if she had water from a specific spring in Michigan. One of these medicines Keewaydinoquay called a “Spring Tonic.” Geniusz says she does not know if this name comes from spring water, one of the key ingredients in this medicine, or from the fact that people often drink this in the springtime. Keewaydinoquay taught that after a winter of eating salty foods and not being very active, a person’s blood would thicken, and this mashkiki would thin a person’s blood and clean out his or her system, both very important things to do to prepare a person’s body for the activity of spring and summer. Geniusz says this medicine is also given to people who have circulatory problems, diabetes, and certain heart problems (pers. comm.). There are other items as well, which although considered mashkiki are also not derived from botanical materials. Huron Smith lists rattlesnake flesh, white clay, and bear fat as being items that are mixed with plants to make various mashkiki. He says that white clay alone, which he calls “waba’bîgan,” is also a mashkiki (1932, 352). Kathryn Osogwin says that when a little skunk oil is hung on the door, disease will not come to that area as long as a little of the odor remains (EWV, notebook 20). Whipple says that when she was a child sometimes a little bit of skunk oil was used to treat her siblings and her if they were sick (pers. comm.). Mary Geniusz says that Keewaydinoquay also spoke of how the Anishinaabeg use skunk oil to treat a patient with pneumonia or another form of heavy congestion. Only a very small amount of skunk oil, approximately one drop mixed with cooking oil, is used to treat heavy congestion. Keewaydinoquay told Geniusz that when she was a child people often used a rabbit skin that had been sprayed by a skunk, or one that was rubbed on something that had been sprayed, as an inhalant in place of  straight skunk oil (pers. comm.).2 It is important to understand these categories so that one can begin to understand how botanical gikendaasowin fits into inaadiziwin and izhitwaawin. Botanical gikendaasowin touches many areas of izhitwaawin, and the concepts that apply to trees and plants, such as those that will be described in the next section, are only a small part of inaadiziwin.  CATAGORIES OF ANIMATE AND INANIMATE WITHIN INAADIZIWIN  The protocols of izhitwaawin dictate that we must make an offering of asemaa (straight tobacco)3 or a mixture of herbs, often written in English kinnickinnick, when asking the assistance of another being. For example, Whipple tells a dibaajimowin about the importance of making an offering of asemaa during a thunderstorm to ask the animikiig (thunderbirds) to pity the Anishinaabeg living in that place and not create weather conditions that could harm them (Whipple 2006a). When working with us on the CD-ROM Asemaa: Tobacco, Ken Johnson, Sr., recorded seventeen teachings describing different times when it is necessary to make an offering of asemaa to different beings. For example, one must make an offering to the beings in a body of water before crossing it and to an elder from whom one wishes to hear a story (Johnson 2006). These offerings are necessary because of the structure of inaadiziwin, which views the world differently than most non-native philosophies and ways of being. Inaadiziwin divides the world into categories of animate beings and inanimate objects differently than other philosophies. Insisting that one cannot understand why the Anishinaabeg “have so much faith in the healing of the plants” without understanding anishinaabe “general philosophy,” Keewaydinoquay says that things such as rocks, trees, and plants, which are considered to be inanimate by the dominant society, are considered animate within anishinaabe philosophy. They, along with all the other beings of Creation, have a special purpose, which they must follow to maintain the balance of this world (1991b). We can find linguistic evidence of this dibaajimowin within Anishinaabemowin, the nouns and verbs of which are divided into animate and inanimate categories. A verb describing the actions of an animate noun cannot be used to describe the actions of an inanimate noun. Therefore, the same verbs that are used to describe the actions of a human being are also used to describe the actions of other animate beings, such as rocks, trees, and certain religious items. For example, when speaking about the importance of asemaa and describing different times that the Anishinaabeg make offerings of asemaa, Ken Johnson, Sr., says, “Asemaan odaabaji’aan Anishinaabe gii-ando-madoodood. M’apii waabamigoowizid Anishinaabe owe biindaakoonaad owe gimishoomisinaanig owe asinii’” (2006). The English translation for this teaching is: The Anishinaabe uses tobacco when she or he goes to a sweat. This is the time the Anishinaabe is seen making an offering to our grandfathers, to these rocks. Here “asemaa” (tobacco) is treated as an animate being because the verb “aabaji’” (to use someone) is said in reference to asemaa. If asemaa were considered an inanimate object, then another verb, “aabajitoon,” would have to be used with it. Of further evidence, however, is the second sentence, in which Johnson says, “Anishinaabe owe biindaakoonaad owe gimishoomisinaanig owe asinii’.” Here Johnson says that the Anishinaabe makes an offering to “gimishoomisinaanig” (our grandfathers). An animate verb is used in reference to “gimishoomisinaanig,” indicating that the grandfathers are considered animate beings, just as they are in English. After grandfathers, Johnson says, “owe asinii’,” indicating that the grandfathers of which he is speaking are rocks. These rocks are spoken of just as one would speak of human grandfathers or any other animate being.
Within inaadiziwin, all of these animate beings are interconnected and dependent upon each other. Biskaabiiyang research terminology describes this interconnectedness as enawendiwin, referring to our relationships with all of Creation (“Anishinaabe Wordlist” 2003). There are dibaajimowinan explaining the interconnectedness and interdependency of every being. One of these, which I heard from Mary Geniusz many times while a child, Basil Johnston describes throughout Ojibway Heritage (1976). This dibaajimowin describes the levels of Creation. It explains that the first beings created on earth were the natural forces, including the rocks, the weather forces, and the aadizookaanag (those spirits who carry our ceremonies, teachings, songs, and stories). The second beings created were the trees and the plants. The third beings created were the awesiinyag, the nonhuman animals. The last beings created were the Anishinaabeg. When all of these beings were created, they promised Gichi-manidoo (the Great Spirit) that they would live together and help all the other levels of Creation survive. This was an important promise, for almost all of these beings need each other to survive. Without the plants, the animals would not be able to eat or breathe. Without the animals, the plants would not be able to move to new locations, and they would not have what we now call carbon dioxide. Without the plants and the animals, the Anishinaabeg would have no food or resources for their survival. Without the first level, including the sun, rain, and teachings, to guide them, all three of the other levels would perish. The only level of Creation that could survive without the other three is the first level, for they were here long before the other levels of Creation. However, if the rocks, natural forces, and aadizookaanag were here alone, they would not be content, for they would not have fulfilled their promise to Gichimanidoo to ensure the survival of all levels of Creation. Inaadiziwin places humans as an integral part of the cycle of life, rather than at the center of the universe or at some level above the animals, plants, and the rest of Creation. Joseph B. Casagrande describes the way that John Mink, a medicine man from the Lac Courte d’Oreilles reservation in Wisconsin, spoke of this part of inaadiziwin:  For John Mink the line between the natural and the supernatural was thinly drawn. His world was filled with an infinite array of spirits and forces that could influence the affairs of men. Nor was man conceived as a creature apart from the rest of nature. For the Ojibwa, as for many hunting peoples, animals and men are akin and the differences between them lay chiefly in outward form. Animals are motivated as men are motivated, live in societies as men live, act as men act and their fates are intertwined. Thus, the Old Man told how when a bear was killed its four paws and head were placed in position on a rush mat and a feast given. The head was decorated with ribbons, beadwork or baby clothes and food and tobacco placed nearby; and speeches were made to the bear’s spirit so that it would return to the village of bears and persuade other bears to allow themselves to be killed. (1955, 118)  Izhitwaawin dictates certain protocols, such as the bear ceremony Casagrande describes, which must be followed in order to keep the balance and maintain enawendiwin. If one performs this ceremony the bear will “return to the village of bears and persuade other bears to allow themselves to be killed.” If one does not perform this ceremony, the bear may not do this, leaving the Anishinaabeg without many important resources, including the bear claws, skin, meat, and grease. Speaking of other protocols that must be followed to keep the balance, Keewaydinoquay says,  Whenever it seems to human kind that it is necessary to change a balance for some desirable end, which the human believes is a good one, then we need to speak to these other beings. We need to talk to the rocks that are going to be ground up to make the foundation of our house and our walks. We need to explain to them why it is that we’re asking them to change form. We need to have them understand and never take a plant for healing without first talking to the species and then to the particular plants that are going to be used, asking for their permission, and asking that they please give healing. (1991b)  These protocols—the bear ceremony described by Mink and the offering made before gathering described by Keewaydinoquay—are ways in which those following izhitwaawin show their respect for the rest of Creation and help to maintain the reciprocal relationships between humans and other beings. Maintaining enawendiwin also requires that we do not waste the lives of other beings. One does not just kill a buck for a trophy set of antlers or a bear for an ornamental rug. If one takes the life of an animal, then one makes use of the usable parts of that animal. Kathryn Osogwin describes how the Anisused to kill deer at the end of winter, around March. At this time, men wearing snowshoes would chase a deer, eventually clubbing it to death when it started to have trouble getting through the hard, icy crust that forms on the snow during that time of year. Osogwin says that the Anishinaabeg could kill many deer this way, but they “never killed a deer to be wasted.” When they did kill a deer, they used all of the meat (EWV, notebook 20). Plants and trees are an important part of enawendiwin, and the same protocols apply to them as apply to any other living beings. The question will inevitably arise here if, from the perspective of izhitwaawin, plants and trees are considered to be animate beings. Keewaydinoquay says they are, and she uses this concept as an example of the great differences between inaadiziwin and non-native philosophies (1991a; 1991b). People who work with Ojibwe language, however, tend to say that some plants are animate while others are inanimate. There really has not been enough research in this area to give a definite answer one way or the other, but it seems that a lot of the inanimate names refer not to the entire plant, but to a part of the plant. Sometimes the name for the seed, berry, nut, or fruit of a plant is an inanimate noun, while the name for the plant is an animate noun. For instance, miinan is one Ojibwe name for blueberries, but this word does not describe the whole plant, it only describes the berries. The name for the entire plant, miinagaawanzh, is an animate noun (Nichols and Nyholm 1995, 89). Similarly, ozhaaboomin, the berry of the gooseberry plant (Ribes oxyacanthoides) is inanimate, but the name of the plant itself,  ozhaaboominaganzh, is animate (Rose, pers. comm.).4 Mitigomin, the acorn of the white oak (Quercus alba), is also inanimate, while mitigomizh, the white oak tree, is animate (Rose, pers. comm.). Rose says that names for plants and trees that end in -min are referring not to the whole plant, but just to a part of the plant or tree, such as a nut or a berry. Many of these names ending in -min are inanimate. I do not have enough names for plants and trees to be certain if they are all considered animate, but of the ones I have collected from elders so far all are animate. The only exceptions I have found in my own collecting of plant names that are inanimate are doodooshaaboojiibik, the dandelion (Taraxacum officinale), and aasaakamig, Sphagnum spp., the moss used for diapering babies (Rose, pers. comm.). These may be examples of inanimate plant names. Doodooshaaboojiibik, although a name for dandelion, refers specifically to the root of this plant because of the ending -jiibik, meaning root. If this name fits in the pattern described above, then there may be another name for this entire plant that is animate. As for aasaakamig, this name is usually translated as “moss used to diaper babies,” and as such this name may be used in reference to the diapering material and not to the plant at all. It is also possible that within inaadiziwin, mosses are not considered plants.


PROTOCOLS FOR GATHERING MATERIALS FROM PLANTS AND TREES

Despite these questions about whether or not all plants are considered animate, the teachings of izhitwaawin tell us that we must make an offering and ask permission before picking any botanical material. Whipple explains, “Akawe, akawe awiiya gegoo baa-mamooyan imaa akiing iw mashkiki, ase-maa akawe giga-asaa ji-biindaakoodaman i’iw wegonen waa-mamooyan” (pers. comm.). Here she says that the first thing someone must do before going to pick medicines is to make an offering of tobacco. Rose explains that it is important to give asemaa when collecting plants, adding that if one is collecting many of the same kind of plant all at one time, this offering only needs to be made at the beginning of the collecting (pers. comm.). Keeway-dinoquay explains that Nodjimahkwe taught her to treat plants just as one would treat an animal or another human being. When one wants to ask for the assistance of a plant, one makes an offering to that plant and asks that being for help: “One goes to the plant people and says, ‘From the ancestors I have learned that your kind has healing,’ whatever it is ... ‘and I ask you will you please heal,’ and then ... whoever it is, is actually recited to the plant like it was another being that you could communicate with. And then ... you would promise that you wouldn’t take so much of it that its grandchildren won’t live after it, which means that you have to learn enough about that plant to learn how it reproduces so that you can see to it that that happens” (1989a). According to Keewaydinoquay, this offering is directed to the plant or tree being collected. She says that one must keep his or her promise to the plant if he or she wants the plant to keep its promise to heal. She says, “To our way of thinking, when you accept the gift of a plant you are, either by way of fueling up with plant food or by applying a plant medicine ... asking that plant to become you” (1991a). It is important to ask a plant’s permission before collecting it because if one does not ask that being’s permission, he or she will not get that being’s spiritual healing. Without the spiritual healing, a person may be physically cured but still sick because that person’s spirit has not been healed. Keewaydinoquay says this often happens in non-native hospitals, when patients are released because they are physically healed—for example, their wounds are healed—but they are still sick (1991a). Hilger explains that the Anishinaabe consultant with whom she gathered plants also spoke directly to those plants when gathering their roots: “She dug a little hole with her hands, placed a small piece of plug tobacco in each, covered it with dirt, and spoke to the plant saying: ‘I’ll take just a little for my use, and here is some tobacco for you!’” ([1951] 1992, 92). Other dibaajimowin say that this offering is made to beings who care for that plant. Huron Smith describes the Anishinaabeg with whom he worked placing “tobacco” in the hole from where a root was gathered. He explains that a song accompanies this offering and both of these things are given to “Grandmother Earth, to Winabojo, and to Dzhe Manido,” so that they may make the medicine being prepared “potent” (1932, 349). When describing how John Mink instructed him to make medicines out of plants, Casagrande writes, “I was carefully admonished to place an offering of tobacco beside the tree or bush or in the root-hole of the plant where, he said, a blind toad always crouched” (1955, 114–15). Angeline Williams explains that if a plant is not properly respected, its owner will follow the one who did not respect the plant. She gives an example of a red flower that grows on the shores of Lake Michigan and is used as a medicine for children. Only adults are allowed to pick this flower, and they are only allowed one each. If an offering is not made when the flower is picked, the snake who owns that plant will follow the person who picked it. She explains that these snakes can “stand up tall” to see who picked these flowers. Williams tells a dibaajimowin about a woman whose daughters picked this flower and put it on their hats. A three-foot black snake with a white stripe and white head followed the girls, until their mother told them to put the flowers alongside the road. When they did this the flowers disappeared, and they  assumed that the snake ate these flowers. Williams adds that another snake “guards” “swamproot,” but  5  that if this plant is gathered in the fall, the gatherer will not see the snake (EWV, notebook 19b). Permission to pick some botanical materials requires more than an offering. Songs must be sung when gathering certain materials. Huron Smith explains that Nenabozho instructed the Anishinaabeg on what roots they should gather and what songs they should sing. Smith presents the following song as an example:  Nin ba ba odji’bîke o’o’we’dasa’ssema I go to gather roots; here is tobacco;  mînode ni nowi nîmîcîn gi wedji’bîkei’en  Give me direct guidance, you, maker of roots  da mino wi dji’bîkei’an. That I may get the proper roots. (1932, 344; italics in original)  The words of this song are similar to a root-gathering song that Keewaydinoquay taught to her oshkaabewisag (M. Geniusz, pers. comm.). From these lines, it appears that this song is to be sung when someone is going out to gather any roots, not one specific kind of root. It is also clear that the singer is making an offering to one who makes roots so that being will give the singer guidance. Densmore relates a  story, which she received from an Anishinaabe man named Maiñ’gans, about a song sung when preparing  6  a medicine made from a specific root. According to this story, a man who was Midewiwin dreamed that water spirits came and told him how to make a medicine called bi’jïkiwûck’. Maiñ’gans continues, “’In order to persuade them to return he composed and sang a song ... He was a young man at the time, but he sang this song until he was old. He sang it whenever he dug the roots or prepared the bi’jïkiwûck’. Others learned it from him and now it is always sung when this medicine is prepared’” (Densmore 1913, 63). Izhitwaawin also requires certain ceremonies and feasts before or after gathering certain botanical materials. The protocols surrounding these ceremonies differ in different communities. Some of these ceremonies are open to the entire community, whereas others are reserved for those with a certain amount of training. Speaking of how the Anishinaabeg of long ago did things, Dora Dorothy Whipple says, “Akawe ge gii-ashangewaad igaye, zagaswewaad o’o gegoo ge wii-izhichigewaad, manoomin ige wii-mamoowaad oshki-miijiwaad. Noongom idash gaawiin izhichigesiiwag” (pers. comm.). Here Whipple says that the Anishinaabeg used to have feasts and ceremonies for what they wanted to do, or when beginning to harvest a food such as wild rice. Gene Prigge quotes James “Pipe” Mustache from Lac Courte d’Oreilles describing a feast held for maple sugaring: “’Maybe a week before sugaring we Indians would hold a feast and ask the Great Spirit for a blessing’” (1981, 1, 7). Ojibwe language teacher Dennis Jones (Pebaamibines) explains how one speaks in Ojibwe about giving a feast for a plant. He says that when someone is feasting a certain plant or tree, he or she says, “Ingaagiizomaa, ‘I am feasting him or her,’” using the transitive animate verb gaagiizom. This verb is used when someone is talking about having a feast for a specific plant, but when someone is just having a feast in general, and not naming who that feast is for, that person would say “niwiikonge” (I am having a feast), using the intransitive animate verb wiikonge (pers. comm.).

PERMISSION FOR GATHERING IS NOT ALWAYS GIVEN  It should be noted that just because one follows the proper protocols before gathering botanical material, one might not necessarily receive permission to take that material. Keewaydinoquay warns that if we use plants, or any other beings, for purposes to which they have not agreed, we will fail at what we are trying to do because that plant did not give its permission and is not lending its strength and spirit to our task. For instance, if a plant does not agree to be part of a medicine, that medicine will not cure its intended patient. As with any being, Keewaydinoquay says, there are ways to tell if a plant says yes or no when it has been asked if it may be used for a certain purpose: “Just as if you ask human beings ... if you may walk through their property, there is something that indicates that it is all right with them... Some people will care an awful lot and they’ll say, ‘Well you better not drop cigarettes ...’ or ‘Hell no! Can you see I’ve got a fence?’ You can tell right away ... what their attitude is going to be and whether they care ... and you get the same kind of a reaction from the plants—the whole thing” (1991b). After giving this teaching, she tells her listeners about a time when one of her students made an offering to a plant and attempted to pick it. Before he could, a bee flew into one of the plant flowers and fell to the ground dead. The man went to Keewaydinoquay and asked her what she thought of this episode. She had him describe the plant to her, and then she told him that the plant was telling him that it was not all right for him to pick it because it was a poisonous plant. Keewaydinoquay tells another story about a time when, after making an offering, she went into a lake to pick cattails. The water started getting deeper and deeper, and the leaves began slipping out of her hands. She continues, “And after about five minutes I sort of caught on. I wasn’t supposed to be collecting cattail plants. Although I had asked, the cattail plant had said, ‘No.’ It was a good idea that I got out of there because, by the time I got out, the waves were going right over the top of the cattails” (1991b). Keewaydinoquay freely shared information such as this with her students because this kind of gikendaasowin is important for anyone living inaadiziwin. As will be explained in the next section, there is other gikendaasowin that is guarded and not open to the public.
