# Hinduism and Environmental Ethics: An Analysis and Defense of a Basic Assumption

Christopher G. Framarin

## 1 Introduction

The literature on Hinduism and the environment is vast, and growing quickly. It has benefitted greatly from the work of scholars in a wide range of disciplines, such as religious studies, Asian studies, history, anthropology, political science, and so on. At the same time, much of this work is obscured by a failure to define key terms and make fundamental assumptions explicit. Consequently, it is at least initially difficult to engage with this literature philosophically. In the first section of this paper, I clarify a central, implicit assumption that many of the authors working in this area share. I argue that scholars writing on Hinduism and the environment assume that a plausible environmental ethic must attribute direct moral standing to individual, living, non-human entities in nature, such as animals and plants. In the second section, I offer a preliminary defense of this assumption. In the third section, I respond to objections, and conclude that the argument is at least initially convincing. If this is right, then the assumption from which many scholars writing on Hinduism and the environment begin is at least initially plausible.  2. A Plausible Environmental Ethic  Much of the scholarship on Hinduism and the environment is concerned with the question of whether certain Hindu texts and traditions entail the proper treatment of nature. Scholars writing in this area frame this question in a variety of ways. They ask whether certain Hindu texts and traditions prescribe ‘a proper human relationship to nature’ (Valpey, 2010, p. 68; cf. Deutsch, 1970, p. 79; Jacobsen, 1994, p. 287; Ray, 1999, p. 218), ‘care for the environment’ (Dwivedi, 2000, p. 19), an ‘ecological approach to nature’ (Rukmani, 2000, p. 102), ‘ecological consciousness’ (Nelson, 2000, p. 129), ‘ecological balance’ (Agarwal, 1999, p. 33), ‘protecting nature’ (Gold, 2000, p. 317), ‘environmentalism’ (Mumme, 1998, p. 136), ‘environmental awareness’ (Chapple, 2009, p. 2), an ‘ecological outlook’ (Rukmani, 2000, p. 101), ‘ecological action’ (Sherma, 1998, p. 89), and so on. Each of these terms and phrases serve, in some way or another, as place markers for what I will call a ‘plausible environmental ethic’. A plausible environmental ethic is a theory of the environment that entails the proper treatment of nature (Norton, 1984, pp. 132–133).1 In asking whether certain Hindu texts and traditions prescribe care for the environment, an ecological approach to nature, environmentalism, and so on, these authors ask whether certain Hindu texts and traditions entail a plausible environmental ethic.2 Scholars writing in this area often disagree over whether a certain Hindu text or tradition entails a plausible environmental ethic. They are in nearly unanimous agreement, however, that a plausible environmental ethic must attribute direct moral standing to nature. To say that nature has direct moral standing is to say that there are possible circumstances in which human agents morally ought to consider nature for its own sake in deciding what to do (Regan, 1981, p. 19, fn1; Timmons, 2007, p. 511). To say that human agents morally ought to consider nature for its own sake in deciding what to do, in turn, is to say that human agents morally ought to count the fact that some action of theirs might benefit or harm nature as a direct, prima facie reason for or against performing the action, respectively. If human agents morally ought to consider a tree for its own sake in deciding what to do, for example, then the fact that my action of carving my name in the tree might harm the tree constitutes a direct prima facie reason against doing so—even if this harm to the tree will not in turn harm any other entity. The fact that my action of watering the tree, in contrast, might benefit it, constitutes a direct prima facie reason in favor of watering it—even if this benefit will not in turn benefit some other entity. Nature is useful to human beings, in the form of clean air and water, nourishment, recreation, and so on, and presumably human agents morally ought to consider nature in deciding what to do for these reasons. Scholars writing on Hinduism and the environment tend to agree, however, that a plausible environmental ethic must claim that these are not the only reasons to consider nature in deciding what to do. Human agents morally ought to consider nature for its own sake as well. In other words, nature has direct moral standing. Few of these scholars make this point explicitly. Some equate a plausible environmental ethic with a theory of the environment that attributes ‘intrinsic value’ to nature (Deutsch, 1970, p. 82; Findly, 2009, p. 343; Gupta, 1993, p. 113; Jacobsen, 1994, p. 287; Nelson, 1998, pp. 65–66; Scheid, 2010, p. 28; Sherma, 1998, p. 106; Tahtinen, 1991, p. 215; Valpey, 2010, p. 80). Others equate a plausible environmental ethic with a theory of the environment that claims that nature is ‘sacred’, ‘divine’, and/or ‘holy’ (Alley, 2000, p. 366; Apffel-Marglin & Parajuli, 2000, p. 292; Dwivedi, 2000, p. 20; Kinsley, 1991, p. 230; Klostermaier, 1991, p. 252; Lee, 2000, p. 258; Nelson, 2000, p. 134; Patton, 2000, p. 39; Rao, 2000, p. 26; Rukmani, 2000, p. 109; Schweig, 2010, p. 91; Sherma, 1998, p. 89; Sullivan, 1998, p. 247; Tahtinen, 1991, p. 215). And some equate a plausible environmental ethic with a theory of the environment that advocates the attitudes of ‘veneration’ and/or ‘reverence’ toward nature (Arapura, 1991, p. 203; Chapple, 2009, p. 29; Coward, 1998, p. 40; Crawford, 1982, p. 149; Deutsch, 1970, p. 82; Dwivedi, 2000, p. 20; Kinsley, 1991, p. 230, 1998, p. 242; Nagarajan, 1998, p. 275; Narayanan, 2001, p. 183; Nelson, 1998, p. 63; Rao, 2000, p. 34; Rolston, 1987, p. 175; Rukmani, 2000, p. 103; Sharma, 1998, p. 57; Sherma, 1998, p. 95; Shiva, 1999, p. 74, 2000, p. 5). The full meanings and implications of the words ‘intrinsic value’, ‘sacred’, and so on are obscure. Consequently, the full meanings and implications of the claims that nature is intrinsically valuable, sacred, and so on, are also obscure. This need not confuse the discussion, however. Since these claims are made in the context of assessing whether certain Hindu texts and traditions entail a plausible environmental ethic—that is, whether these texts and traditions entail the proper treatment of nature—these authors must take these claims to entail that human agents have certain moral obligations toward nature. If these claims do not entail that human agents have certain moral obligations toward nature, then they are irrelevant to the question of whether certain Hindu texts and traditions entail a plausible environmental ethic. A number of authors draw this inference explicitly. Lina Gupta, for example, claims that according to the Bhagavadgı ̄ta ̄, ‘all parts of Nature have an intrinsic value; as such, all of Nature should be treated with dignity, kindness, and righteousness’ (1993, p. 113). O. P. Dwivedi claims that ‘veneration, respect, and acceptance of God in nature is required of Hindus in order to maintain and protect the natural harmonious relationship between human beings and nature’ (2000, p. 5). In other words, the intrinsic value, sacredness, and so on of nature entails that human agents morally ought to consider nature in deciding what to do. Furthermore, these authors must take the claims that nature is intrinsically valuable, sacred, and so on to entail that human agents morally ought to consider nature for its own sake in deciding what to do. If, instead, they take these claims to entail only that human agents morally ought to consider nature in deciding what to do.

Furthermore, these authors must take the claims that nature is intrinsically valuable, sacred, and so on to entail that human agents morally ought to consider nature for its own sake in deciding what to do. If, instead, they take these claims to entail only that human agents morally ought to consider nature in deciding what to do for the sake of human beings, but not for the sake of nature itself, then invoking intrinsic value, sacredness, and so on is unnecessary. The claim that human agents morally ought to consider nature in deciding what to do for the sake of human beings, after all, is presumably true even if nature is not intrinsically valuable, sacred, and so on. So presumably these claims are meant to entail more than this. The point, instead, must be that since nature is intrinsically valuable, sacred, and so on, nature has direct moral standing. The words ‘intrinsic value’ are notoriously ambiguous (Green, 1996; Korsgaard, 1983; McShane, 2007; O’Neill, 1992; Samuelsson, 2010). In their least controversial sense,3 however, they refer to the value that something has as an end, independent of the value of further ends to which it is a means. If the fact that nature has value implies that human agents morally ought to consider it in deciding what to do—as these authors imply—then presumably the fact that nature has value as an end implies that human agents morally ought to consider nature as an end, and hence for its own sake, in deciding what to do. This is Ellison Banks Findly’s (2009) point when she claims that Hinduism’s attribution of ‘inherent worth’ to animals and plants entails that animals and plants have rights, and that ‘all moral agents’ have corresponding duties to respect those rights (p. 343). Daniel P. Scheid (2010, p. 28) makes the same basic point when he says that if something has intrinsic value, then it ‘is worthy of ethical consideration for its own sake’. Similarly, it would be quite strange to say that nature is sacred, divine, or holy, and hence that human agents morally ought to consider nature in deciding what to do, but then admit that human agents could treat nature in any way they see fitdestroy it, deface it, and so on—so long as it did not negatively affect other entities. If the Yamuna ̄ River is sacred, then human agents morally ought to consider it for its own sake in deciding what to do, as opposed, for example, to considering it merely as a means to removing human and industrial waste from towns and cities.4 David Kinsley (1991, p. 235) qualifies the sacredness that certain Hindu texts and traditions attribute to the land as ‘intrinsic sacredness’. Presumably this means that the land is sacred for its own sake, and hence that human agents morally ought to consider the land for its own sake in deciding what to do. Unto Tahtinen makes the same point when he attributes to the Bhagavadgı ̄ta ̄ the claim that ‘all life is ‘‘holy’’ in the sense that it has value by itself, inherently’ (Tahtinen, 1991, p. 215). Likewise, it would be strange to say that human agents ought to venerate or revere nature, but then admit that human agents could treat nature in any way they see fit, so long as it did not negatively affect other entities. If the Vr__n _da ̄vana Forest deserves  veneration, then human agents morally ought to consider it for its own sake in deciding what to do, as opposed, for example, to considering it merely as a source of firewood, or a place of recreation.5 Lance E. Nelson understands reverence in this way when he says that according to Advaita, nature, ‘far from being worthy of reverence . . . is without [intrinsic] value’ (1998, p. 66). In other words, something is worthy of reverence only if human agents morally ought to consider it for its own sake in deciding what to do. Holmes Rolston III defends the same basic view.
He claims that Hinduism fails to value animals and plants ‘for what they are intrinsically’, and hence does not advocate ‘[r]everence for life’ (Rolston, 1987, p. 175).6 The point, again, is that a Hindu text or tradition entails a plausible environmental ethic only if it attributes direct moral standing to nature. The word ‘nature’, however, is ambiguous as well. It might refer to (1) nature as a whole, and/or (2) wholes in nature—such as ecosystems, species, communities, and so on, and/or (3) individuals in nature—animals, plants, and so on. Consequently, the claim that a plausible environmental ethic must attribute direct moral standing to nature is ambiguous. It might mean that (1) a plausible environmental ethic must attribute direct moral standing to nature as a whole, and/or (2) a plausible environmental ethic must attribute direct moral standing to wholes in nature, and/or (3) a plausible environmental ethic must attribute direct moral standing to individuals in nature. Many of the authors that I’ve mentioned leave the word ‘nature’ (and its synonyms) unanalyzed, and hence fail to clarify which of these claims they mean to endorse. Among those that do clarify this term, however, none deny claim (3)—that a plausible environmental ethic must attribute direct moral standing to individuals in nature. Indeed, when these authors are specific about what they mean by the word ‘nature’, they invariably mention individual entities. Vasudha Narayanan, for example, singles out trees as bearers of (presumably)7 direct moral standing in the Matsya Pura ̄_na (Narayanan, 1997, p. 300). T. S.  Rukmani claims that Hinduism advocates ‘reverence for trees, and, by extension, for all that is in nature’ (Rukmani, 2000, p. 103). K. L. Sheshagiri Rao lists rivers, oceans, and so on as ‘sacred’ (Rao, 2000, p. 32), and claims that various Hindu texts and traditions advocate ‘reverence for all forms of life’ (Rao, 2000, p. 34). As I mentioned, Findly (2009) says that various Hindu texts and traditions claim that animals and plants in particular have direct moral standing. Indeed, even those authors who emphasize the interconnectedness or unity of nature in Hindu texts and traditions—which might otherwise suggest a concern with wholes, rather than individuals—conclude that these texts and traditions attribute direct moral standing to individual entities. Eliot Deutsch (1970), for example, emphasizes the claims in Advaita Vedanta that ‘everything in nature is interconnected’ (p. 80) and that ‘fundamentally all life is one’ (p. 82). His conclusion, however, is that ‘everything in nature, when properly seen, is invested with intrinsic spiritual worth’ (Deutsch, 1970, p. 83, emphasis added). Scheid, who emphasizes the claim that nature is best understood in terms of a ‘web of life’ (2010, p. 28)—an image invoked almost invariably by those advocating the direct moral standing of wholes—argues that Veda ̄nta De ́sika (a fourteenth-entury  ́Srivais_ _nava theologian) attributes ‘an incalculable [intrinsic] value to nature’.  He explains, however, that ‘[a]ll of these [individual] beings, from rocks to humans to gods’ are the basis of this value (Scheid, 2010, pp. 32–33). The claim that a plausible environmental ethic must attribute direct moral standing to nature, then, implies that a plausible environmental ethic must attribute direct moral standing to individual entities in nature.
On this matter, environmental ethicists and scholars writing on Hinduism and the environment are in general agreement. The most influential argument in favor of this view states that the alternative—a strict holism, according to which only wholes have direct moral standing—entails a kind of ‘environmental fascism’ (Regan, 2004, p. 362)—‘the submergence of the individual . . . in the glorification of the collectivity’ (Callicott, 1999, p. 71).8 It is hard to see how a view of this sort could avoid unapologetically prescribing the ‘culling’ of large numbers (and perhaps a great majority) of human beings, for example—a claim that most take to be straightforwardly unacceptable. Scholars writing on Hinduism and the environment also disagree about the individual entities in nature to which a plausible environmental ethic must attribute direct moral standing. As I mentioned, Deutsch (1970), Rukmani (2000), Scheid (2010), and others equate a plausible environmental ethic with a theory of the environment that attributes direct moral standing to ‘everything in nature’. Others, like Findly (2009), however, seem to say that an environmental ethic might be plausible even if it only attributes direct moral standing to living entities in nature, such as animals and plants. This divergence of opinion is apparent in the most common arguments for the claim that certain Hindu texts and traditions attribute direct moral standing to entities in nature. One argument, endorsed by Deutsch (1970), Harold Coward (1998), and others, claims that entities in nature have direct moral standing in virtue of being interconnected with everything else in nature. This implies that everything in nature has direct moral standing, whether living or non-living, since non-living entities might be just as interconnected with the rest of nature as living entities are. Another argument, endorsed by S. Cromwell Crawford, Anantanand Rambachan, and others, claims that entities in nature have direct moral standing in virtue of having an a ̄tman (an eternal, immaterial self) (see Crawford, 1982, p. 150; Rambachan, 1989, p. 289). This suggests that only living entities have direct moral standing, since only living entities possess an a ̄tman. Those who endorse this interpretation, however, take it to entail a plausible environmental ethic nonetheless. Two additional arguments claim that entities in nature have direct moral standing because they are identical with brahman (God) (Chapple, 1993, p. 75; Dwivedi, 2000, pp. 5–6) and/or emanate from brahman (Coward, 1998, p. 40; Gupta, 1993, p. 113; Klostermaier, 1991, pp. 250–251). This again suggests that the entities in nature that have direct moral standing are not limited to those that are alive, since those traditions that claim that living entities in nature are identical and/or emanate from brahman also claim that non-living entities in nature are identical and/or emanate from brahman. The claim that a plausible environmental ethic must attribute direct moral standing to individual, living entities in nature, however, is a common denominator among these positions. While the class of living entities is thought to include plants, animals, humans, ghosts, demons, gods, and so on, it is typically the moral status of animals and plants in particular that is of interest to scholars working on Hinduism and the environment. In other words, scholars writing on Hinduism and the environment agree almost unanimously that a plausible environmental ethic must attribute direct moral standing to animals and plants.
3. A Preliminary Argument for the Direct Moral Standing of Animals and Plants  Thus far I have argued that scholars writing on Hinduism and the environment assume that a plausible environmental ethic must attribute direct moral standing to animals and plants. When I say that these scholars ‘tend to assume’ that a plausible environmental ethic must attribute direct moral standing to animals and plants, I mean that they tend not to offer explicit arguments in support of this claim. This is true of many environmental ethicists as well. It is beyond the scope of this paper to provide a definitive argument for the claim that animals and plants have direct moral standing. At the same time, it is important to see why so many people find the claim highly plausible. As a means to this, I will rehearse an argument that many take to at least put the onus of proof on those who would deny it. I will also consider certain objections to the argument, and argue that they are unconvincing. The argument I have in mind is Richard Routley’s Last Man Argument. The original formulation of the argument reads as follows:  The last man (or person) surviving the collapse of the world system lays about him, eliminating, as far as he can, every living thing, animal or plant (but painlessly if you like, as at the best abattoirs). What he does is quite permissible according to basic chauvinism [that is, anthropocentrism], but on environmental grounds what he does is wrong. Moreover one does not have to be committed to esoteric values to regard Mr. Last Man as behaving badly. (Routley, 1973, p. 207)  Suppose that there is just one person left on earth. Suppose, additionally, that this person has only a few hours left to live, and that his welfare will be maximized by destroying every living thing that he can. It might be, for example, that this last person finds fire exhilarating, and that the only way for him to avoid spending his last hours in devastating depression and torment, thinking about his imminent demise, the loss of loved ones, and so on, is to spend his last hours bringing about an inferno. So he drives fuel truck after fuel truck into the old growth forests of British Columbia. Finally, when he has only minutes left to live, he lights the fuel trucks ablaze, so that he can observe a magnificent wildfire in his dying moments. If anthropocentrism is true, then only human beings have direct moral standing. Since the last person is the only person in the world (and since there will be no other people in the world in the future), only the last person has direct moral standing. The actions that will benefit him most are the actions that I have described. This benefit constitutes a prima facie reason for performing these actions. The prima facie reason is not overridden.9 Hence the last person has an ultima facie reason for performing these actions. Hence, according to anthropocentrism, the last person should do just what he does, all things considered. Yet surely the last person acts wrongly. Hence anthropocentrism is false.10 This initial paraphrase of the argument might be schematized as follows:  The Last Man Argument  Premise One: Anthropocentrism is true. (Assume.)  Premise Two: If anthropocentrism is true, then the last person does not act wrongly in destroying the animals and plants of the old growth forests of British Columbia.  Premise Three/Conclusion One: Hence, the last person does not act wrongly in destroying the animals and plants of the old growth forests of British Columbia, which is absurd.  Conclusion Two: Hence, anthropocentrism is false.  If anthropocentrism is false, then it cannot be that only human beings have direct moral standing. One alternative is to attribute direct moral standing to all, or some subset of animals as well. The fact that burning the forests will benefit the last person constitutes a prima facie reason for the actions he performs. This reason for burning the forest is overridden, however, by the fact that burning the forest will harm a wide range of animals—black bears, cougars, bald eagles, wolves, loons, and so on. Hence all things considered, the last man acts wrongly in burning down the old growth forests of British Columbia. The problem with this response is that the Last Man Argument can be modified, so that the last person acts wrongly even though he does not harm animals. Suppose that all animals—in addition to all human beings other than the last person—have perished. If only human beings and animals have direct moral standing, then only the last person has direct moral standing. The actions that will benefit him most are the actions I have described. This benefit constitutes a prima facie reason for performing these actions, and the prima facie reason is not overridden. Hence the last person should do just what he does. Yet his actions are morally wrong. This second version of the Last Man Argument might be called the Last Man Argument (Revised). It can be schematized as follows:  The Last Man Argument (Revised)  Premise One: Only human beings and animals have direct moral standing. (Assume.)  Premise Two: If only human beings and animals have direct moral standing, then the last person does not act wrongly in destroying the plants of the old growth forests of British Columbia.  Premise Three/Conclusion One: Hence, the last person does not act wrongly in destroying the plants of the old growth forests of British Columbia, which is absurd.  Conclusion Two: Hence, it is false that only human beings and animals have direct moral standing.  A second alternative is to attribute direct moral standing to plants as well (and perhaps other individual entities in nature). The fact that burning the forests will benefit the last person constitutes a prima facie reason for the actions he performs. This reason for burning the forests is not overridden by any reasons related to other human beings or animals, since there are none. The reason is overridden, however, by the fact that burning the forests will harm a wide range of plants—red cedars, fir, hemlock, yew, ferns, mosses, and so on. Hence all things considered, the last person acts wrongly in burning down the old growth forests of British Columbia—but only if plants have direct moral standing. Once this conclusion is reached, it seems uncontroversial to add that animals must have direct moral standing as well.  4. Three Responses to the Preliminary Argument  There are at least three possible responses to the Last Man Argument (Revised). The first response admits that the events described in the argument warrant disapproval, and takes the last person’s actions as the object of moral disapproval. It insists, however, that the wrongness of the last person’s actions can be explained without attributing direct moral standing to animals or plants. Bryan G. Norton (1984) offers a response of this sort. He claims that the last person might act wrongly because he violates the ideal of living in harmony with nature (Norton, 1984, p. 135). He argues that the ideal of living in harmony with nature, in turn, might be justified in terms of ‘rational or religious reasons’11 that do not assume or entail the direct moral standing of entities in nature (p. 136). Norton offers a possible example. He says that it might be that in destroying the forests, and thereby violating the ideal of living in harmony with nature, the last person hinders his own ‘spiritual development’. Indeed, Norton attributes this view to Hindu traditions in particular. ‘Hindus . . . in proscribing the killing of insects, etc. show concern for their own spiritual development rather than for the actual lives of those insects’ (Norton, 1984, p. 136).12 If this account is right, then acting in accord with the ideal of living in harmony with nature would benefit the last person by contributing to his spiritual development, and he would thereby have a reason to live in harmony with nature, even though nature lacks direct moral standing. To act as the last person does, however, is to violate this ideal, forsake the opportunity for spiritual development, and hence act wrongly. This kind of account faces a number of objections, however. First, even if acting in harmony with nature will benefit the last person by contributing to his spiritual development, this only amounts to a prima facie reason for him to avoid burning the forests. In the last person’s circumstances, however, there are other, seemingly stronger prima facie reasons for him to do so—namely, the avoidance of devastating depression, the exhilaration of starting the fire, and so on. Yet it seems that the last person’s actions are not simply prima facie wrong, but ultima facie wrong. Better, one might think, to spend one’s final hours a happy, slightly spiritually impoverished arsonist than to spend one’s final hours a miserable spiritual seeker. In order to avoid this first objection, Norton must claim that the spiritual development of the last person is of greater benefit to him than the avoidance of devastating depression, and so on, and hence constitutes an ultima facie reason against burning the forests. Under the assumption that the last person has only three hours to live, however, this claim seems implausible. One option is to argue that the last person is maximally benefited by acting in the way that is conducive to his spiritual development because he will be reborn in a subsequent life, and the quality of the circumstances of his next birth will depend on his level of spiritual development. Indeed, this might be what Norton has in mind when he mentions Hindu traditions as an example.13 This kind of reply makes a second objection to the initial response more apparent, however. The second objection is that environmental ethicists do not want the plausibility of an environmental ethic to depend on the plausibility of controversial religious claims (Rolston, 1987, p. 175). The example of spiritual development might be seen as suspect from the outset for this reason. It is certainly suspect if it assumes the truth of rebirth. This second problem can be avoided if we understand ‘spiritual development’ in some secular way, in terms of moral improvement—greater patience, better moral judgment, unselfishness, and so on—and jettison the claim about rebirth.14 Without the appeal to rebirth, however, the first objection—according to which spiritual development amounts to a merely prima facie, and hence defeasible reason to avoid burning the forests—remains. A third objection is that the connection between living in harmony with nature and moral improvement (or spiritual development) is highly speculative. As Tom Regan says, ‘[c]omparing the crime rate of strip miners and accountants would probably provide a good deal of hard empirical evidence against it’ (1981, p. 25). The same might be said in comparing the crime rates of butchers or florists and accountants. If there is a connection between living in harmony with nature and moral improvement, then it is hard to see why there is not a similar connection between living in harmony with human artifacts and moral improvement. There is, after all, no moral difference between entities in nature and entities outside of nature per se, according to this view. Yet the last person’s act of starting a great fire among the abandoned buildings in downtown Vancouver does not seem wrong in all of the ways that burning the old growth forests is wrong. Kant famously argues that human agents should avoid harm to animals as a means to avoiding becoming inured to the suffering of human beings (Kant, 1996, pp. 212–213). This claim might be defended on the grounds that at least certain animals react to pain in ways that are similar to human beings. A dog, for example, yelps when kicked in much the same way a person might, and if an agent is indifferent to the yelps of a dog, he might be less sensitive to the yelps of a person. Even if this is right, however, the justification cannot easily be extended to non-sentient animals and plants, since their reactions to harm do not resemble those of human beings. Indeed, the responses of presumably sentient animals, such as fish, snakes, and so on do not resemble those of human beings either.
A fourth objection is that the last person’s actions seem morally wrong because of the destruction they cause the forests, not because they preclude the last person’s incremental moral improvement. In order for Norton to be persuasive, he must convince us that once we think about the last person scenario carefully, we will discover that what we are really incensed by is the last person’s squandered opportunity for moral improvement, and not the destruction of the forests. Yet this seems implausible. Indeed, if the only thing wrong with the action is that it precludes the opportunity for moral improvement, then the action is only wrong in a prudential, rather than moral sense, and we are simply wrong to morally disapprove of it—or the last person himself—at all. The second response also claims that the events described in the Last Man Argument constitute a violation of a human ideal, and therefore warrant moral disapproval. It explains this moral disapproval not in terms of the wrongness of the last person’s actions, however (as the first response does), but in terms of the moral shortcomings of the last person himself. Thomas E. Hill offers a response of this sort. He claims that  even if there is no convincing way to show that the destructive acts are wrong (independent of human and animal use and enjoyment), we may find that the willingness to indulge in them reflects the absence of human traits that we admire and regard morally important (Hill, 1983, p. 215).  Hill claims that the last person violates the ideal of self-acceptance in particular.15 He explains that ‘[o]ne fails to accept oneself when the patterns of behavior and emotion are rooted in a desire to disown and deny features of oneself, to pretend to oneself that they are not there’ (Hill, 1983, p. 221). What the last person seems to desire to disown about himself is that he is ‘part of nature, living, growing, declining, and dying by natural laws similar to those governing other living beings’. He denies that he shares ‘many of the needs, limits, and liabilities of animals and plants’ (Hill, 1983, p. 222). Our moral disapproval of the events described in the last person scenario, then, are explained by our moral disapproval of the lack of self-acceptance that the last person reveals in destroying the forests. The second response faces a number of objections as well, however, some of which parallel objections to the first response. First, even if the last person violates the ideal of self-acceptance in burning down the forests, this only amounts to a prima facie reason for moral disapproval. There are other, perhaps stronger prima facie reasons to approve of the last person, however. After all, the last person manages to avoid severe, yet unnecessary suffering in doing what he does, and this might amount to acting in accord with some extended ideal of benevolence. Yet, again, it seems that the last person’s actions are not simply prima facie wrong, but ultima facie wrong. Second, the moral indignation that arises in response to the events described in the Last Man Argument seem to have to do primarily with the destruction of the forests. In order for Hill to be persuasive, he must convince us that once we think about the last person scenario carefully, we will discover that what we are really upset about is the vice or lack of virtue of the last person, and not the destruction of the forests per se. Yet this seems just as implausible as the claim that once we think about the last person scenario carefully, we will discover that what we are really upset about is the last person’s squandered opportunity for moral improvement. A third, related objection is that the degree of moral disdain that we feel toward the last person is not well explained by Hill’s account. A person might exhibit a much more profound lack of self-acceptance by uttering a single sentence, such as ‘I have never made a mistake in my life.’ Yet the moral reaction in this case pales in comparison to the moral reaction to the events described in the Last Man Argument. Hill, it seems, must explain this away. Indeed, Hill himself mentions other examples that seem to evidence a lack of selfacceptance—people who dye their hair gray or dress as if they are 20 years younger. He emphasizes that these behaviors ‘do not necessarily imply lack of self-acceptance’ (Hill, 1983, p. 221, italics in original). The same is true, however, for the behaviors of the last person. He might acknowledge his similarity with those entities he destroys, but choose to destroy them nonetheless, perhaps as a means to avoiding devastating depression, just as a person who dyes his hair might acknowledge that he is getting older, but choose to dye his hair nonetheless, perhaps as a means to professional advancement, or greater success in dating. The third response to the Last Man Argument simply denies that the events described in the Last Man Argument warrant moral disapproval. It denies both that the actions of the last person are wrong, and that the last person himself exhibits any moral shortcoming in doing what he does. While a number of environmental ethicists defend accounts that seem to entail these claims,16 no one explicitly offers this third response to the Last Man Argument. This suggests that the basic claim with which the Last Man Argument begins, namely, the claim that the events described in the Last Man Argument warrant moral disapproval, is widely accepted. Consequently, I take this third response to be at least initially implausible. All of this suggests that the Last Man Argument is at least initially convincing. If the Last Man Argument is initially convincing, then the assumption with which so many scholars of Hinduism and the environment begin—namely, the assumption that a plausible environmental ethic must attribute direct moral standing to animals and plants—is at least initially plausible. If this is right, then the answer to the question of whether certain Hindu texts and traditions entail a plausible environmental ethic does indeed depend, at least in part, on the answer to the question of whether certain Hindu texts and traditions attribute direct moral standing to animals and plants. 5. Conclusion  A central question among scholars writing on Hinduism and the environment is whether Hindu texts and traditions entail the proper treatment of nature. In other words, most scholars writing on Hinduism and the environment are concerned with whether Hindu texts and traditions entail a plausible environmental ethic. While these authors often disagree over the answer to this question, they tend to agree almost unanimously that a plausible environmental ethic must claim that human agents morally ought to consider animals and plants for their own sakes in deciding what to do. That is, most scholars writing on Hinduism and the environment claim that a plausible environmental ethic must attribute direct moral standing to animals and plants. The Last Man Argument does not definitively prove that a plausible environmental ethic must attribute direct moral standing to animals and plants. It does, however, put the onus of proof on those who would deny it.
