BALUSKA AND LEVIN (2016) ON HAVE NO HEAD: COGNITION THROUGHOUT BIOLOGICAL SYSTEMS

The central nervous system (CNS) underlies memory, perception, decision-making, and behavior in numerous organisms. However, neural networks have no monopoly on the signaling functions that implement these remarkable algorithms. It is often forgotten that neurons optimized cellular signaling modes that existed long before the CNS appeared during evolution, and were used by somatic cellular networks to orchestrate physiology, embryonic development, and behavior. Many of the key dynamics that enable information processing can, in fact, be implemented by different biological hardware. This is widely exploited by organisms throughout the tree of life. Here, we review data on memory, learning, and other aspects of cognition in a range of models, including single celled organisms, plants, and tissues in animal bodies. We discuss current knowledge of the molecular mechanisms at work in these systems, and suggest several hypotheses for future investigation. The study of cognitive processes implemented in aneural contexts is a fascinating, highly interdisciplinary topic that has many implications for evolution, cell biology, regenerative medicine, computer science, and synthetic bioengineering.  Keywords: aneural, cognition, plants, bioelectric signaling, computation, memory, information, learning  INTRODUCTION  Survival in a complex, dynamic, and highly competitive environment requires biological systems to make numerous decisions with respect to possible activities (Conrad, 1996; Holcombe and Paton, 1998). Evolutionary pressure to optimize decision-making has led to the inevitable exploitation of past history (memory) and information processing (computation). Importantly however, decisions are made at every level of biological organization. For example, multicellular organisms, such as animals and higher plants, exhibit multilayer complex goal-directed behaviors also at their cellular and subcellular levels. Underlying physiological systems must maintain homeostasis and predict future conditions (Freddolino and Tavazoie, 2012) in the face of unpredictable changes in environmental conditions, while cells must coordinate their activity in an exquisite 3dimensional ballet of embryogenesis and complex organ regeneration. At the extremes of the scale of organization, dynamic self-organizing subcellular components like cytoskeleton and molecular networks (Albrecht-Buehler, 1985; Craddock et al., 2012; for plant cells see Volkmann and Baluška, 1999; Barlow and Baluška, 2000) and colonies of organisms (Shapiro, 1998; Couzin, 2009) perform similar functions in their own contexts. Here, “cognition” refers to the total set of mechanisms and processes that underlie information acquisition, storage, processing, and use, at any level of organization (Lyon, 2015). Memory is an essential component of these processes, at all levels. For our purposes, memory can be defined as experiencedependent modification of internal structure, in a stimulusspecific manner that alters the way the system will respond to stimuli in the future as a function of its past. This requires a labile yet stable medium, to provide the necessary latency. The process may or may not involve a degree of intelligence, in the sense of the ability to compress prior stimuli into informationallycompact representations (inference). In essence, sensory memory is a message to one’s future self – a view reminds us that memory is thus another instance of biological communication (which, as exchange of signals, is ubiquitous among all levels of biological organization). Put this way, we can see that in principle many biological mechanisms can be exploited for this purpose. The updates in the configuration (or state) of a system, as occurs also during sensory memory formation in all organisms, is formally known as “computation” in computer science. These concepts are quite general. However, outside of the unconventional cognition community (Calvo and Baluška, 2015) or biological computation community (Adamatzky et al., 2008), it is widely assumed that memory is the exclusive province of brains, or even complex animals. Older work exploring these issues in plants (reviewed by Gremiaux et al., 2014), non-neural somatic tissues (Mackie, 1970), and even inorganic media (Bose, 1926), have been largely forgotten in favor of the remarkable advances in recent cognitive neurosciences with their focus on the brain. Nevertheless, plant cells are known to be able to use action potentials to control their movements and behavior since times when Charles Darwin and Jagadis Chandra Bose turned their interest toward plants (Darwin, 1880; Shepherd, 2005; Baluška et al., 2009a). Currently, surprisingly, higher plants are emerging as behaviorally active organisms, enjoying bio-communication and showing plant-specific cognition and intelligence (Trewavas, 2005, 2014; Karban et al., 2014a,b; Calvo and Baluška, 2015; Calvo, 2016). Here, we survey a wide-ranging literature on memory and sensory systems-based cognition in organisms (biological systems) lacking animal/human-type brains. Our goal is to acquaint readers interested in cognition with numerous aneural model systems in which this subject can be pursued, and to draw the attention of bench biologists working on those systems to cognitive, information-focused perspectives on the mechanisms they are studying. Importantly, in discussing cognitive performance in the various systems, we do not mean the full-blown human-like cognitive performance, or humantype of self-awareness and consciousness. We are avoiding issues of the ‘Hard’ problem of cognitive science, and do not claim anything like higher-order symbolic representations. Our definition is purely functional and minimalist (Calvo and Baluška, 2015), drawing attention to the similarities in computational tasks performed by diverse biological systems, at all levels of complexity, other than animal and human brains. Figure 1 illustrates the full spectrum of cognitive levels and capabilities upon which the various systems we discuss can be placed (Rosenblueth et al., 1943). Our review begins with a consideration of the familiar substrate of cognition: neural dynamics, and of mechanisms that blur the boundaries  between neural and non-neural cell functions. We then proceed through progressively more divergent cognitive systems, considering molecular networks, single cell behaviors, networks of cells in various tissues, and organism-wide information processing during regenerative repair. We conclude with some common threads of cognition across levels of organization, which suggest a unified perspective on these highly diverse systems.

CONCLUSION
How does biological matter give rise to decision-making, memory, representation, and goal-directed activity? Implementation-independence is a core principle of computer science: an algorithm does what it does regardless of what kind of medium is implementing the steps. However, in the biological sciences, the study of memory and other cognitive functions has largely been the province of neurobiology, which studies the information processing and computational functions of one type of system: collections of neurons. Instead, we have surveyed a broad range of systems at various scales, from molecular to organismal, which have their own distinct ability to process information, make decisions, and achieve specific goal states (Figure 3). Neural-like computation, decision-making, and memory have been reported in sperm (Alvarez et al., 2013), amoebae (Zhu et al., 2013), yeast (Caudron and Barral, 2013), and plants (Gagliano et al., 2014), using ubiquitous mechanisms like cytoskeletal elements which appear to be also involved in neural information processing (Sahu et al., 2013). It is clear that neural networks have no monopoly on such functions. Remarkably, it is not only the positive (adaptive) cognitive functions that are widely conserved: some of the same illusions to which advanced brains’ perception and rational reasoning fall prey are being found in systems from slime molds to multi-animal colonies (Beekman and Latty, 2015; Sakiyama and Gunji, 2016). McCulloch said “Why the mind is in the head? Because there, and only there, are hosts of possible connections to be performed as time and circumstance demand it” (McCulloch, 1951). Given the facts of protein, cytoskeletal, transcriptional, and bioelectric networks, it appears that many different media at various scales have the ability to form and rewire experiencedependent connections. The “dynamical hypothesis” (van Gelder, 1998) asks, what if the brain is better understood as a dynamical system, than a computational one? We invert this hypothesis, and ask what if some dynamical systems are better understood as cognitive agents? The appearance of memory and computation at many levels of biological organization suggests a fractal organization of cognitive subsystems within systems molecular, cellular, tissue, and body-wide (Figure 2). This has been suggested in the brain [Smythies’ nested doll hypothesis, (Smythies, 2015)] but may indeed exist throughout the biological world. Whether each successive level of organization is in some sense smarter than the ones below it, or whether structures derive their cognitive powers from those of lower levels, remains to be discovered. It should be noted, however, that even in advanced brains, the relationship between cognitive capacity and biological  structure is not trivial to pin down, as shown by the occasional example of potent function in the presence of severe structural deficits (Lorber, 1978, 1981; Nahm et al., 2012). The hypothesis of nested, widely prevalent cognitive layers suggests a rich research program, including: (1) the development of improved methods for reading/writing bioelectrical state information into somatic tissues and sculpting non-neural bioelectric circuits (optogenetics beyond excitable cells and in the synthetic biology of gap junction and neurotransmitter signaling; Adams et al., 2013), (2) continued work on cracking the bioelectric code (bioelectric state information maps onto the topology of various patterning outcomes in tractable model systems such as planaria; Tseng and Levin, 2013), (3) formulation and testing of quantitative, molecular models of LTP, habituation, sensitization, plasticity, and higherorder learning applied to protein interaction networks, gene regulatory circuits, cytoskeletal dynamics, and cell behavior during morphogenesis, (4) use of reagents that impact cognition (hallucinogens, anesthetics; Kawamoto et al., 2005), stimulants, nootropics/cognitive enhancers, etc.) in cellular, developmental, and regenerative patterning assays to probe conservation of pathways between neuroscience and morphogenesis, (5) creation of larger-scale computational models of regeneration and functional experiments in morphogenesis based on goal-seeking and error minimization algorithms with molecularly specified metrics (Slack, 1980; Chao et al., 2008), (6) exploration of molecular models of cognitive concepts (attention, autism spectrum, sleep, visual illusions/hallucinations, addiction) in specific patterning and mispatterning contexts, (7) bioengineering platforms that reward and punish in vitro patterning systems for specific changes in growth and morphogenesis (instrumental learning and top–down control of shape in developmental or regenerative contexts), and (8) a mechanistic investigation of the mechanism of persistence of memories through massive brain regeneration, which is likely to reveal the interface between somatic and neural memories (Blackiston et al., 2008; Shomrat and Levin, 2013). We have avoided here the thorny issues of philosophy of mind that arise from trying to define exactly under what conditions words like “knowledge” are appropriate, in favor of an intentional stance-like pragmatic, engineering approach grounded in cybernetics. The coverage of cognitive terms across biology can expand to the extent that information-centered approaches are shown to be effective in predicting and controlling the behavior of biological systems. The practical implications for biotechnology, unconventional computation, and regenerative medicine are enormous. Equally likely, the lessons we learn from unconventional cognitive systems will deeply impact our most basic understanding of how mind emerges from the brain.
