For centuries a certain conventional wisdom prevailed concerning Descartes’s views about animals. He was long assumed to maintain not simply that animals are morally inferior to human beings, but that they are in fact due no moral obligations whatsoever. On this view, Descartes was able to justid such practices as vivisection on the grounds that nonhuman animals are mere machines. Scientists need have no moral scruple about cutting up live animals because animals have no souls, and their shrieks of what would appear to be pain are nothing but purely mechanical responses on the part of creatures with no experiential or perceptual capabilities, and consequently no capaciy whatsoever to feel pain. This interpretation of Descartes’s views about animals dates back to Henry More’s famous letter to Descartes in which he charged Descartes with “the internecine and cutthroat idea that you advance in the Method, which snatches life and sensibiliy away from all the animals.”1 In part 5 of the Discourse on Method, Descartes developed his most explicit and systematic argument for the essential diference between human beings and nonhuman animals. There he maintains that the latter lack reason and language, and he assimilates them to machines.2 This rationale led not only More but also such recent commentators as Boyce Gibson and Norman Kemp Smith to endorse the view that Descartes considered animals to have no moral status at all, Smith going so far as to call Descartes’s position “monstrous.”3 In the course of his writings, Descartes presents two additional criteria for distinguishing animals from human beings, although only one of them proves to be decisive for the question of the moral status of animals.4 One of these criteria is mentioned at the end of part 5 of the Discourse and is developed in some of Descartes’s other writings, namely the criterion that animals lack immortal souls. The other is that animals are incapable of conscious perceptual states such as pain because they are mere machines, in contrast with human beings that, like all sentient beings, have the capaciy to be aware of their bodily states. On the strongest readings of Descartes’s “monstrous” thesis, Descartes’s denial of feeling in animals is a fundamental basis for his denying that animals have moral worth. The position taken by the likes of More and Smith was long considered to be unimpeachable. But in recent years a controversy has emerged regarding Descartes’s views on animals. Several commentators have sought to overturn this conventional wisdom as a simple misreading of Descartes’s views. For example, John Cottingham tries to demonstrate that Descartes never denies feeling to animals. Implicit in Cottingham’s argument is the proposition that if Descartes acknowledges that animals do feel, then one cannot plausibly defend the traditional claim that Descartes was indifferent to the sufering of animals.5 Peter Harrison takes a diferent tack to arrive at the same conclusion: On Harrison’s view, not only does Descartes believe that animals possess souls, but in addition Descartes never denies that animals can think.6 Harrison believes that these considerations lend support to Cottingham’s claim that history has done an injustice to Descartes as regards his views about animals. And most recently, Stephen Gaukroger argues for the view that Descartes acknowledged the capaciy for something resembling conscious perceptual states in animals. On Gaukroger’s view, Descartes’s awareness of such perceptual states in animals makes it impossible for Descartes to have believed that animals are mere unfeeling machines.7 All three of these commentators take the position, either implicitly or explicitly, that Descartes had a much more enlightened view of animals than is generally recognized. Cottingham believes that Descartes “was not altogether beastly to the beasts,” and Harrison goes so far as to maintain that whereas “Descartes is commonly portrayed as one whose view of animals is morally repugnant. . . . Such moral indignation is misplaced.”8 Naturally, if animals can be said to have (something like) consciousness of their experiences and particularly of perceptual states like pain, and if it can be shown that Descartes held such a view, it would be impossible to endorse the traditional view that Descartes was “a brute to the brutes.” How could such complete disagreement arise over the views of a 134 ■ descartes on the moral status of animals  philosopher known to have placed a great premium on clariy? One source of confusion over Descartes’s views on animals is the fact that he never sets forth a de0nitive statement of his position concerning the rational and perceptual capacities of animals; instead his views emerge from a troubling ambiguiy that can be dispelled only through a consideration of the overall spirit of Descartes’s philosophy and the tradition of thinking about animals that forms the essential background of Descartes’s views. In the end it is possible to form a clear conception of Descartes’s views concerning the moral status of animals. Careful consideration of Descartes’s writings, the overall mission of his philosophy, and the relevant philosophical antecedents of his thought point toward the conclusion that the views of thinkers like Cottingham, Harrison, and Gaukroger are based on a selective reading of Descartes’s remarks about animals and tend to ignore the spirit of his philosophy and his call for human beings to render themselves “the masters and possessors of nature.”9 It must be granted that Descartes never formally and de0nitively declares that animals are mere resources that we may use as we wish; but he says enough to make it clear that he considers animals to be of an inferior rank to humans in the order of creation, and that he considers animal experimentation to be an acceptable practice. In the end I rea2rm the conventional wisdom about Descartes on animals, although not without some quali0cation. Beyond the fact that Descartes never presents an unequivocal statement of his views about animals, determining what his position must have been is complicated by an additional problem. There is a troubling tendency in recent scholarship on the matter to conlate Descartes’s views with certain current sensibilities about the nature of animal experience generally and about the proper moral status of animals in particular. It is as though current defenders of Descartes simply cannot believe that he held a view that is repugnant by contemporary standards, so they attempt to revise Descartes to make his views acceptable by those standards. In doing so, such commentators distort the views that Descartes explicitly advances in his writings, and they distort their readers’ understanding of Descartes’s place in an entire historical context of philosophical thinking about animals. Moreover, they make some fundamental mistakes concerning the nature of consciousness; to this extent, their revisionist reading of Descartes is founded not only on a historical misunderstanding but on a crucial systematic distortion as well. The views of Aristotle, the Stoics, and Christian theology culminating in Aquinas are decisive for understanding Descartes’s views about animals. Fundamental to Descartes’s position on animals is the ontological status that he attributes to corporealiy. In line with a commitment that extends at least as far back as Aristotle, Descartes presents an ontology according to which immaterial things are superior to material ones. Embodiment is a sign of imperfection; the less dependent a being is on corporealiy, the more perfect the being is.10 Any being that is wholly corporeal is of the lowest order of being; and given Descartes’s appeal to mechanism as the means for representing or explaining corporealiy, this means that any being that can be explained exhaustively in mechanistic terms is of the lowest order of being. In the following discussion, I demonstrate the link between Descartes’s commitment to the mastery of nature and his views on the moral status of animals: Nature is taken in its essence to be pure corporealiy, which for Descartes is fully explicable in terms of inert mechanism. Whatever is pure corporealiy or mechanism is not worthy of moral respect, and this allows human beings to treat nature as a storehouse of energy and raw materials that are available for the satisfaction of human desires. In this regard, if his appeal to the technological imperative of systematic mastery distinguishes Descartes from his philosophical forbears, the inferior ontological and moral status that he attributes to animals does not: To the extent that Descartes considers animals to be mechanism and nothing more, he is committed to the view that animals can be used like any natural resource, without moral scruple. Notwithstanding the distinctive contribution that Descartes’s conception of mechanism makes to the historical project of using nonhuman beings for the satisfaction of human needs, Descartes’s conviction that we have no duties toward animals is wholly in accordance with a tradition of thinking about animals that extends back to antiquiy. I have shown, however, that the tradition is not univocal in its denigration of animals to the status of instrumentalities for the satisfaction of human needs. This holds not only for antiquiy but for the Renaissance and early moderniy as well. As regards defenses of animals, the main point of connection between these historical periods is the thought of Plutarch, who inluenced both Montaigne and Giovanni Battista Gelli. Montaigne and Gelli each articulate views that express what George Boas refers to as “theriophily,” the position “that the beasts—like savages—are more ‘natural’ than man, and hence man’s superior.”11 Boas states that it is to theriophilists such as Montaigne and Gelli that Descartes directs his mechanistic polemic concerning animals, and I consider the positions developed by these thinkers before turning to an examination of Descartes. Six years after Copernicus published De revolutionibus orbium coelestium, Gelli published his own version of Plutarch’s Gryllus under the title Circe.12 Like Plutarch’s dialogue, Gelli’s is founded on the conceit of Odysseus’s (Ulysses’, in Gelli’s version) demand that Circe return his men to human form after they have been turned into animals. But where Plutarch’s dialogue follows the terms of the Odyssey in considering the men to have been turned into swine, Gelli imagines the men having been transformed into a loose hierarchy of animals ranging from an oyster to an elephant. Ulysses endeavors to persuade each of the animals that they are better of being changed back into human form. Only the elephant ultimately consents to become human again. All of the others ofer reasons why they are better of as animals, citing the supposedly superior temperance, strength, happiness, and so forth of animals. Only the elephant ultimately accedes to Ulysses’ desire that he be returned to his prior human state. He does so on the grounds, ofered by Ulysses, that animals act in naturally instinctive ways and lack the capaciy for free self-determination that is unique to human beings and the hallmark of human superioriy. Ulysses presents an account of animal instinct that closely resembles Aquinas’s position, even citing the sheep-wolf example that Aquinas employs to argue for the principle non agunt sed magis aguntur, that animals do not move themselves but instead are moved instinctively by external objects of desire and aversion.13 Human will, in contrast, is capable of genuine self-determination in virtue of rationaliy, which makes possible conceptual abstraction and logical inference. This enables human beings to pursue not only self-preservation but also “the happiness and perfection of [their] being.”14 Gelli lauds this capaciy in the same humanist terms that Pico della Mirandola uses in his Oration on the Digniy of Man to argue that human beings are the envy even of the angels: Freedom makes us “just like a chameleon,” in that a human being can, “like a new Proteus . . . transform himself into whatever form he elects” and “make of himself either a terrestrial or a divine creature by piercing through all the barriers to the state which his own free will most desires.”15 There is some controversy as to whether the elephant’s endorsement of this humanist perspective is ironic; Adams suggests that Ulysses “extorts” the elephant’s compliance, which is at best “very lim ited and conditional.”16 There is some evidence for this in the text; for example, at several points the elephant complains that it is unable to follow some of what Ulysses is saying.17 But the overall thrust of Gelli’s Circe is that human beings are the envy of the entire universe in virtue of their “chameleon-like” capaciy for self-determination, just as the Renaissance humanists argue.18 Comparably ambivalent is Montaigne’s attack on the traditional presumption of human superioriy over animals. Writing a generation after Gelli, Montaigne maintains in several of the essays that the earthly estate of human beings is no better than that of animals and may in fact be inferior. Anticipating Rousseau, Montaigne argues that “there is nothing barbarous in what is under [nature’s] guidance,” and that we have “quite smothered” nature with our arts and various inventions.19 Human civilization modeled on the ideal of Plato’s Republic is far removed from the “common kinship” characteristic of the golden age.20 Montaigne invokes numerous examples from Plutarch to counter the prejudice of “imaginary kingship” over animals that has predominated in the tradition.21 But he stops conspicuously short of advocating equaliy and full reciprociy between human beings and animals, and argues instead that he “[does] not put much stock” in “that cousinship between us and the animals.”22 We do have “a general duy of humaniy, that attaches us not only to animals, who have life and feeling, but even to trees and plants.” Our duy, however, is one not of reciprocal justice, but simply one of benevolence, as for Plutarch in his Life of Cato the Elder. “We owe justice to men, and mercy and kindness to other creatures that may be capable of receiving it. There is some relationship between them and us, and some mutual obligation,” but not so much that animals deserve to be accorded the rights due to a full-ledged (human) member of sociey.23 The limits of Montaigne’s “theriophily” come into focus when we consider the motivation underlying the Apology for Raymond Seybond. The Apology is a key text in the revival of Pyrrhonian scepticism in the sixteenth century. Montaigne’s aim is to argue that knowledge is ultimately powerless to grant us certitude in life. It is simply in virtue of “foolish pride and stubbornness . . . that we set ourselves before the other animals and sequester ourselves from their condition and sociey.”24 From the standpoint of our earthly capacities and condition, we are no better than animals, and in some respects we are arguably inferior. But unlike animals, we are not merely earthly creatures. Montaigne concludes the Apology with